[MUSIC]
I worked at this place, CWI, and
for my then current project,
which was the Amoeba operating system,
which I was working under Sape Mullender.
One of our projects was to
write application-level
utilities for
this new Amoeba operating system.
And so, there was an operating system kernel
and it was very good at
talking to the network.
And it was very good at managing processes.
But there wasn't much user-level software.
There was barely a shell,
I think there was a ported, very old
Unix shell something like the original
Unix version six shell, but
because the file system model
on Amoeba was so very different
we couldn't take an existing
suite of Unix utilities.
And so we wanted it to be self-hosting.
And in order to that we realized we need
a large amount of user-level sort of
applications, utilities, tools,
whatever you call it, from
an editor to a mail program to
a login utility and a backup tool.
And one of the things I realized,
as we had a small team of people sort of
working on those things, that it was very
slow going writing all that stuff in C,
and it wasn't particularly interesting or
sort of novel or
difficult and often we also didn't
really care how fast the code ran.
All the reasons why you would
write a piece of software in C
didn't really apply.
The only reason left was that C
was the only language that for
which we had a compiler.
There was this ABC language that I had
in the back of my mind that would be
a much better language to write a whole
bunch of utility application tools for
Amoeba, except that ABC was so
high and abstract that it really.
It wasn't a good language
to talk to servers and
file systems and
processes and it's sort of,
the whole operating system thing
was abstracted away from ABC.
It was almost something
like it, I don't know.
In an alternate universe ABC could have
become the language of spreadsheets.
It was very good for
talking about a user's data.
And doing all sorts of clever stuff with
that data. And it did that using very,
sort of general all-purpose
data structures like lists and
dictionaries and
of course it had very nice code
structuring devices like a small
number of simple statements
that could be combined in any way you
wanted to create other constructs.
The usual function and
procedure abstractions.
It was not at all an object oriented
language although the implementation had
some objects sort of shining through.
Anyway ABC as it existed
still wasn't usable but
I somehow, since I had worked on the ABC
project, I knew exactly how it was built.
And I had this idea in my head that,
given how much
time we had available for our project, I
could actually build a whole new language,
design and implement it from scratch,
given what I learned about both the design
and the implementation of ABC, and
start using it to implement
our suite of tools and
still be ahead of the game compared to
a situation where we would just have sort of
clunked on writing the things
we wanted to write in C.
For three months, I did my day job and
at night and whenever I got
a chance I kept working on Python.
I believe that within three months I was
to the point where I could tell people,
look here.
This is what I built.
And it had an interactive
interpreter loop.
So the first demos were all
let's assign an expression to
a variable and print it back.
And let's define a small function and
call it.
And let's put some things in an array and
iterate over the array.
And all those things worked.
And somehow, and
I don't exactly know sort
of how fast this happened,
but certainly my two office mates were
almost instantly taken with it and
started helping out.
And they and
a few others within the institute
were very excited about
this thing that I'd built.
And started sort of,
of course we didn't instantly
use it on Amoeba because it
wasn't mature enough to actually write
the Amoeba utilities that we wanted.
But it was already instantly useful
enough to run on our Unix system.
People within CWI, even outside my
own department, started using it.
And recognizing that it was fun and
productive to use.
And they used it for small scripts and
people started contributing
things like bug fixes.
Somehow things then went very
quickly during that first year.
Because I think by the end of 1990,
so a year after I started,
we developed a plan to do an open
source release of this language.
And this was before the word open
source had even been coined.
So we didn't call it that.
But we did have some models.
We had like X11,
the window system at the time,
had a distribution that was one
of the sort of open source examples.
With two colleagues I worked
sort of building a distribution and
we, actually it turned out
to be very simple to get
management to sign off on this release.
That was an an incredibly lucky stroke.
I just sort of, I asked my manager's
manager what should we do about this and
he said oh, you gotta talk to this and
this person in the administrative
branch of the institute.
And I talked to this woman and
she was like in charge of all
legal affairs I believe and
I said well I have written this source
code and I would like to release that and
I have sort of made up a license that's
like identical to the MIT license,
I could say MIT releases software under
exactly this license and we just put like
the formal name of our institute in there
instead of the regents of the institute.
She asked me some questions like did
someone pay for this to be developed?
And my answer was no,
I started it all on my own time and
it was for this research project and
that sort of.
My manager's fine with it.
And so she said sure, go ahead.
And we did it and that's so
in February '91,
we did the first Python release.
It felt like, at the time
like an incredible milestone.
We needed to post it to Usenet.
There was this Usenet newsgroup that
would receive source code for
random free projects.
I got immediately started getting
useful positive feedback from,
well initially just from random people
who picked up free software from Usenet.
And we quickly sort of got into
a routine of doing new Python releases.
And every time, I mean there were the
obvious improvements to the language and
the library and bug fixes,
a very important category of things that
were often contributed were ports or
ported fixes where people had different
architectures, different compilers.
The Unix world was much less
homogenous at the time.
There were lots of small Unix vendors
that had their own compilers, or
their own hardware.
All sorts of things.
So the big things that happened during
say the first half of the '90s was
a community of Python users and
developers self-organized.
Then came the invitation to come to
the United States for a couple of months
from NIST, the National Institute for
Standards and Technology.
So I spent two months there.
We organized the first Python workshop,
which was hosted by NIST.
Through that Python workshop I met
people who offered me a job and from '95,
I mean I went back to the Netherlands for
a few months and then from '95 to 2000
I worked in US in northern
Virginia at CNRI.
And so there we worked through a lot
of growth of the community and
the infrastructure. We created
the Python website, I got in touch with
a bunch of people who are still active in
the Python community like Barry Warsaw.
I think when I started there Python
1.3 was about to be released.
And then while I was
there we released several
subsequent versions leading
up to 1.5.2 which for
some reason 1.5.0 was nothing but
1.5.2 remained the sort of
the standard, the gold standard of Python
for a very long time afterwards.
[MUSIC]